#summary Speakers running at port 44100 tcp/udp playing raw PCM audio stream
#labels Concept,UserStory,Phase-InProcess

== User Story ==
I've got an old box with speakers in my network. Now I need a fast way to transmit sound to this box. I would like to avoid complicated protocols, discovery etc. Plain way to send sound over network, so the box can immediately transmit it to speakers.

== Details ==
As the system should be as simple as possible, there is *no discovery or negotiation*. Client sends audio data in *raw audio PCM format* defined below to explicitly specified server name/IP address. Server plays immediately, perhaps mixing several streams together. No volume control, no cache control - nothing. Server may have a buffer for gapless playback, but should not cache large amount of data to stop playing almost immediately after transmission is stopped.

*Raw audio socket* uses port *TCP/UDP port 44100*
  * numbered after sampling rate - see below

*Raw audio PCM format* is defined as:
  * *PCM 16bit, little endian, signed, 44.1kHz, stereo, left interleaved*
    * it is audio CD PCM format with the same quality
    * it is also old school top grade SB16 setting
    * should work "out of the box" on many platforms including DOS
    * easy to implement as no codecs are used


== Remarks ==
 * everybody on the same network can make your box shout
 * you can "ping" your colleagues in headphones over WiFi
 * if you need access control - start server on local interface and forward stream to it from your own port
 * server may accept packets at a faster rate if requested to do so by some other external means, but by default it's buffer is limited. Client also can limit the amount of sent packets

== References ==
 # http://wiki.multimedia.cx/index.php?title=PCM#Red_Book_CD_Audio
 # http://www.absoluteastronomy.com/topics/Red_Book_%28audio_CD_standard%29
 # https://developers.google.com/native-client/devguide/coding/audio

== Implementations ==
 || [https://bitbucket.org/techtonik/audiosocket/src/tip/audiosocket.py audiosocket.py] || Public Domain || Python || -- Windows only -- ||